The central processing unit,
also called the CPU,
is the centerpiece of every
computer hardware architecture.
It is the hub of computation, if you will,
because this is where all the calculations
of the machine take place.
And it is also the seat of control.
This is where decisions are made about
which instruction should be fetched and
executed next.
In this unit,
we're going to talk about the Hack CPU,
the specification of the, of the CPU, and
how we actually are going to build it.
Now, as usual, it always pays off
to start with the abstraction.
So we can think about the Hack CPU
as some sort of a black box magic
that performs two truly remarkable things.
First of all, well, it's a 16-bit
processor, like, the entire computer.
And the first thing that it can do is,
given a certain instruction,
written in the Hack language,
it will execute this instruction.
Now, this is something which in my
opinion is truly remarkable and dramatic.
Because up until this point,
when you wrote programs,
the programs existed on a piece of paper,
they were completely static,
they were simply a bunch of symbols
that described some fantasy
of the programmer who wants to
actually make something happen.
But now,
we can actually take these programs and
put it into a machine that
turns them into reality.
The programs become music
that you can listen to or
video clips that you can watch.
Or some airline reservation system or
whatever.
So the CPU is this very unique and
special agent
that takes this program specification and
turns it into a reality.
And if this were not
enough in its own right,
the CPU can also do something
not less remarkable.
In the process of executing the current
instruction, it also figures out somehow
which instruction should be executed next
in the program which is currently running.
And, of course, since we talk about
the Hack computer, we assume all these
programs are written in the Hack
machine language that we studied or
looked at in, in week four.
So given that this is the CPU's
abstraction, the next thing that I'd like
to discuss is the more detailed
specification of this apparatus.
Well, the first thing that we have to
remember is that the CPU does not work
in isolation.
It is connected to other
devices Inside the computer.
In particular,
in this particular Hack architecture,
the CPU is connected both to the
instruction memory and to the data memory.
With that in mind, here is the specific
input and output connections of the CPU.
And let us begin to review them from
left to right and from top to bottom.
So, first of all,
we have three inputs coming from
three completely different sources.
First of all,
there is the 16-bit data value, which is
the value of the currently
selected data memory register.
This is the value that the CPU
is going to operate on.
Now, what exactly do
we want the CPU to do?
Well, the next input,
which we decided to call instruction,
which is a very sensible name,
describes a 16 bit input which
is the value of the selected
instruction memory register.
And remember that at any
given point of time,
there is always a selected register
in the instruction memory, and
there is always a selected memory
register in the data memory.
So always something comes into the CPU.
The third input,
which we decided to call the reset,
is a one bit input which I will
discuss later in this unit.
On the right hand side,
we see the outputs of the ALU.
So, first of all, if the ALU wants to
write something to the data memory,
it has to specify three different things.
Number one,
what is it that we want to write.
And this is stored in or
admitted through an output called outM.
Number two, where do we want to write it.
We have to provide an address, and this
is the the job of the next data output.
And, the third output is a load bit
that enables the data memory for
write operations.
So these are the three data outputs,
if you will, of the CPU.
In addition,
there's one extremely important output,
which we decided to call PC for reasons
that will become clear in a few minutes.
And this output holds, by some sort of
magic, the address of the next instruction
that has to be fetched and executed
in the next cycle of this computer.
So how do we implement this magic?
How do we make all these
good things actually happen?
Well, here is one way of doing it.
This is our proposed implementation of
the functionality that we just described.
It is not the only way to build a CPU,
but this is a, a pretty good one,
because it's very elegant and
simple and relatively easy to do.
So before we get into the actual
details of this architecture,
let us look at the interface.
If we look at the interface
of this hardware diagram,
we see that it is 100% identical
to what we saw before.
We have three inputs coming in and
we have four outputs coming out.
And, given that we made this observation,
we can now delve into the details
of the actual architecture.
Another important thing that we have to
look at before we begin to understand
before we begin to understand what is
going on here, is that within this
architecture, we have many labels,
labeled by the catch all
symbol C, which I use to represent
the notion of control bits.
So in order to make all
these chips work together,
the designer of the CPU has to
make sure the different bits,
different control bits, arrive to
the right locations, and these multiple
messages together will cause the CPU to do
what it's what it's supposed to be doing.
Now, if you look at this architecture,
you know, after the first minute or
two of bewilderment, you will realize that
everything here is extremely standard.
You see the LU,
which you built in in project two.
We see three registers, which we call A,
D and [COUGH] and PC, and
these registers are identicals to chips
that you built in in project three.
And we see two muxes, which we built in in
week one of the course, in project one.
And therefore, putting together this
architecture is just a matter of
assembling chip parts that you already
built in previous weeks in this course.
Another thing that you see in this
diagram is all these C labels,
which indicate control bits that go
into various locations in various chips.
Now, we have intentionally left those
the specification of these
control bits somewhat opaque,
because we want you to figure out how to
actually piece all these things together.
And we'll have much more to
say about it in the unit that
discusses how we actually
build this architecture.
Now, before we build it,
we have to describe what this
architecture actually does.
And in doing so I find it kind of,
interesting to think about this
architecture as an orchestra.
An orchestra that works together, many
different instruments in order to produce
some great symphony and the symphony is
the execution of the current program.
You know, just like a regular orchestra,
it can, it can play many
different pieces of music.
And the current program determines
what it actually executes.
So I would like in the remainder
of this unit to focus on different
sections in this architecture.
And let us begin with this section that
deals with the current instruction.
So zooming in on this section,
we see that it consists,
mainly of, a register called A.
And an instruction input that connects
to this register through a multiplexer.
And here is,
an A instruction arriving to the,
machine in the current cycle or
some cycle.
And here is also the symbolic mnemonic
of the same instruction which is
easier to read but obviously the computer
doesn't care about it all this is just for
communications between me and you.
So we see that this instruction seeks to
load the value 3,001 into a register.
And of course, to do everything in binary.
So in order to carry out this instruction,
the CPU has to do several things.
First of all,
it has to decode the instruction.
It has to take the 16-bit value and
separate it into an op-code and
a 15-bit address or a 15-bit value.
By the way,
how do we know that it's an A instruction?
Well, we can look at the op-code.
The op-code is zero, and according to
the heck machine language specification
it means that it's an A-instruction.
So the CPU says, aha,
I know what to do with it.
I have to take the next 15-bit,
value and put it inside the A register.
And notice that this is exactly what the,
the gate diagram does.
The the 16 bit values go through
the register and, and into the register.
Another thing that the CPU does and
we can not see it in this diagram
in order to avoid clutter.
But this is something very simple.
It takes the output of the A-register and
admits it outside
the [COUGH] the CPU via the output which
we call I think address M or M address.
You can look it up in the overall
architecture of the computer.
So this is how the CPU
handles an A instruction.
Now the next thing that we
are going to look at is how
the CPU handles a C instruction
because after all in this,
hack machine language we have
two generic instruction types.
An A instruction and a C instruction.
So we have to be able to entertain and
handle any one of these instructions.
Well the C-instruction,
like the A-instruction,
consists of different fields.
And the first field is the op-code
which happens to be one.
This is how the CPU can tell
that this is a C-instruction.
But in addition to this,
we have several other fields.
And we can see them, we can see them more,
more clearly if we look at the symbolic
manifestation of the same instruction.
Now notice that I'm using the color coding
to associate the bits with the symbolic
mnemonics but these colors obviously are
completely meaningless for the computer.
They are just a way for us to,
to communicate more easily in the course.
So how does the CPU handle
with such an instruction?
Well, you may have guessed the first
thing that needs to be done is to decode
the instruction.So the ALU takes this,
16 bit value and
it decodes it into four different fields.
And these fields will later on be used,
in order to, power up and
manipulate different elements
inside the computer architecture.
What we discussed so far was how,
the CPU handles the instruction, but
if you look at the gate diagram,
you'll see that the same
A register can be also fed,
not necessarily from the instruction
input, but rather from the ALU output.
So we have to decide in some cases we
want the A register to be fed from
the instruction and in other cases we want
the area to be fed from the ALU output.
No you may have guessed how we do it.
We know that in different situations we
deal with two different constructions,
in some cases its an A instruction
with a op-code of 0, and
in this case we want the input
to come from the instruction.
In other cases its C instruction,
with an op-code of 1, and
in this case we want to,
to route the input of the A,
A register in such a way that
the input will come from the ALU.
So it is the job of the CPU,
designer to inspect
the op-code of the incoming instruction
and decide from which source
the A register will take it's
it's next contents so to speak.
Alright, so this is roughly how the CPU
handles incoming instructions and
let's go back to the overall
architecture and focus on
the next section that I would like to
discuss which is the operation of the ALU,
which is by far the most, complex,
part of this architecture.
All right.
Now, we see here, this, segment,
that deals with the ALU, and
we see a C instruction coming in, instead
of the instruction that we saw before.
And let us remember that the C instruction
consists of different fields of bits,
each one of which means something else.
And another thing that we have to remember
is that the ALU is a combinational chip.
It always computes something,
there's always some inputs coming in and
there's always some output coming out.
And when you look at the,
diagram you see that the inputs of
the ALU come from two different sources.
One of them is the D register,
the current value of the D register and
the other one is either
the value of the A register or
the value of the selected memory,
memory register.
And there is a multiplexer that
takes care of this decision
of where to take the value from.
And the control bit of this multiplexer
is one of the bits in the instruction.
So, once again, the CPU designer
has to take care to take this bit
that determines from which we want
to read the input of the ALU.
And then the ALU will then
get the correct inputs, or
the inputs that the programmer
intended it to receive.
So we have the inputs lodged in
the input spans of the ALU, and,
the ALU goes to work, and
how does it know what to do?
Well, the ALU also has,
six control bits that, basically,
taken together, tell or specify the ALU
which operation we want to carry out.
Now, these bits are taken
from the instruction, and
I'm using some color coding here to,
to help distinguish which bits go where,
but of course these colors
are completely meaningless as far as
the computer is concerned And
I'm using them only for didactic purposes.
So the CPU designer has to
take these six green bits or
more accurately copies of these bits and
root them all the way to
the control bits of the ALU.
So now that we have all this information,
we have, the input data.
We have the,
operation that we have to carry out.
We can actually,
you can actually compute something.
And out comes the ALU output.
Now, inspecting the diagram,
we see that the ALU
output is simultaneously fed Into
three different destinations.
The first destination is the D-register.
The second destination is the A-register
and it goes through a multiplexer.
And the final destination is outside
the interface or the chip, so to speak.
So the same ALU is fanned out
into three different places and
so we have this situation that we have
the same ALU output knocking
on three different doors.
But the first the fact that it
knocks on these doors does not
necessarily mean that
the doors are going to open.
We have to decide or the programmer has
to decide, which door has to be opened.
This decision is made by the next field
of bits that I want to focus on and
these are called in our jargon,
we call them destination bits.
We have three destination bits and
these bits determine whether or not to
open the D-register, the A-register and
the data memory to accept the ALU output.
So, if for example,
the green bytes would have been 000,
then it's very nice the ALU computes
something, but this value would be lost.
No container in this computer will will
be open for business, so to speak.
And if we set these green bits to 1111,
then all of the containers will receive
the same output simultaneously.
So we can play with these bits as,
as we've done
in week four when we wrote programs
although we did it in assembly and
then symbolic way,
we can do it with machine language.
And once again we have a way to program
this architecture so that the ALU output,
output would be selectively absorbed by
different locations in this architecture.
All right.
Moving along, another thing that we
have to remember is that the ALU also
computes and outputs to control outputs,
which I think we call the ZR and, and NG.
And these two control bits
are document whether or
not the ALU output is negative or zero.
And these two outputs play a key
role in what will be described next,
which is the control logic of the CPU.
But before we talk about this logic,
I want to as promised,
I want to say a few words about
the reset input that we see coming,
coming in to the diagram from the left
hand side at the bottom of the slide.
And of course, when you build and
shape all these sides, up, down, left,
right, mean absolutely nothing, but it's,
it's useful h, to communicate about
it when we talk about gate diagrams.
So let us say a few words
about this recent bit.
And in order to do it,
we have to try to envision how
the heck computer will look like if
we actually set out to build it.
Well, it will be a black box and
as you see,
this black box is equipped with
a single push down button.
And this push down button is
called reset in our in our jargon.
And the idea is the following.
This black box, the hack, the head
computer is already loaded with some
program written in Hack machine language
and up until now, it does nothing.
The program is inside,
but nothing is happening.
Well, if you take your finger and
push this reset button in and let, let go,
what will happen is that the computer
will start running the current program.
Well, you look at whatever
comes out of this computer and
then in a few minutes you will see that we
can attach a screen to it and a keyboard.
You look at the program's execution and
at some point,
you decide to reset the computer or
rerun the same program again.
You take your finger,
you push it inside the the reset button.
You let go and by doing this,
the computer will restart
running the same program again.
Okay?
So this is the kind of behavior that we
want to implement in the in the control
logic of the CPU, among other things.
All right.
So now that we understand how the reset
button works from the outside
of the computer, so to speak.
Let's go back to the CPU logic and
explore the control logic of the CPU.
Well it doesn't make sense to talk
about control if we don't have some
instruction that that gives meaning
to to the control operation.
So here is an example of a instruction and
it's a schematic instruction,
it's not zeros and ones.
But they used some mnemonics to and
also color coding,
which is completely meaningless
as far as the computer goes.
I use these mnemonics and colors in
order to emphasize that we have here,
here different fields of bits each
field is designed to do something else
in the overall computer architecture.
And when we talk about control,
I want you to focus on these 3 bits,
which we call the junk bits.
If you recall, if the three jump bits are
zero, it represents a no jump situation.
If the three jump bits are one,
it represents unconditional go to.
And any other combination of zeros and
ones in the jump bits
represents a conditional go to.
What I've just said is part of the Hack
machine language specification.
And now, it's the job of the CPU to
turn this specification into reality,
to realize this obstruction.
So how do we do it?
Well, the hero of our story is a humble
register called program counter,
it's actually a counter and the program
counter is also called PC in our jargon.
And in what funnels, we want to
focus on what happens inside the PC.
So here is the desired operation
of a typical program counter.
First of all, and, an for most the one
thing we want the program counter to
do is to always emit the address of the
next instruction that has to be executed.
So let's keep this in mind.
Now, if you want to start or
restart the computer.
Well, in this case,
we have to set PC to zero,
because we want to execute the first
instruction in the program.
So PC equals zero makes a lot of sense.
Otherwise, if we have a no jump situation,
if the current
instruction is such that
the three j bits are zero,
then we want the program counter
to increment by one step.
So that the next instruction that we will
execute will be instruction number one,
and then instruction number two and
three and four and so
on as long as we don't have a jump.
However, if the current instruction
is such that all the j bits are one,
then we have a conditional, I'm sorry.
We have an unconditional go to.
And in the case of an unconditional go to,
we want to set the PC to A.
Why?
Because if the programmer,
if the programmer knows what he is doing,
then the programmer has all,
already taken care to enter the address
you want to jump to, to the A register.
So if we do PC equals A, PC,
the program counter will emit
the address of the next instruction
that has to be executed.
And finally, if only some of
the j bits are, are, are one.
One or two of the j bits are one
then we have a condition of go to.
If we have a conditional go to,
we have to look at the ALU output and
decide if this go to should
actually materialize.
That's the whole idea of conditional.
We have to check if
the condition is true or false.
If the condition is true,
Then, we want to make a jump.
Otherwise, we want to ignore the go to and
just do PC++.
So, I hope that you are convinced
that this abstraction makes sense,
that's exactly how a program counter
has to work in every computer,
and, what remains to be seen is
how do we actually make it happen?
Well, the answer is already,
on the screen here in front of you, the,
logic architecture is such that the PC
will do exactly what we want it to do.
And let us convince ourself
that this is indeed the case.
Well, let's look at the, reset input,
and remember that in order to
start the computer, in order to cause
the computer to start, executing the kind,
the kind of program, we push
the reset button in, and we let go.
So if PC, I'm sorry, if the register
is one, we want to set PC to zero.
Otherwise, we have to look
at the current instruction.
And the current instruction may or
may not have, jump bits.
If the jump bits are.
Well, given any combination of jump bits,
you know,
all the way from zero zero
zero zero to one one one and
all the possible eight combinations
of three, of three, jump bits.
Given every one of these combinations,
we have to look at the jump bits and
simultaneously look at the ALU output.
And decide if we really
want to carry out the jump.
So, in the slide I describe this,
decision as a function.
This f function which I made up.
Completely meaningless in the computer,
architecture.
But, I'm using this, symbol f to
to try to say that we look at these
two different pieces of data together.
We combine somehow, this information,
and we make a decision.
Do we want to jump or not?
I store the result of this
decision in the symbol load.
And if you look at the diagram,
you can see that this load is actually
the load bit of the program counter.
So if load ends up being one,
yes, we want to jump.
So we PC equals A.
PC equals.
The current,
value on the register which contains
the address to which we want to jump.
Otherwise we do PC pass pass.
At the end of all this operation and
all the dust clears what we'll
get is that the PC always
emits the address of the next instruction
that has to be fetched and executed.
This, pretty much raps up the,
the description of the CPU implementation,
and the only thing that remains
to do is to actually build it.
But before we set out to build it, we
have to remember that all this complexity
is just one element in the overall
computer architecture.
That said,
it is by far the most complex and
interesting element in the architecture.
And, we're going to build it.
Not now, but, after the next unit.
Because in the next unit,
we'll describe the overall,
architecture of the Hack computer,
and then we'll get our hands dirty and
actually set out to build both the CPU and
the entire Hack computer.